docs: StatusCheck in Workflow (#299)
chaos-mesh/website: docs/status-check-in-workflow.md

---
title: Status Check in Workflow
---

> In Workflow, the status check could execute specified operations on external systems, such as application systems and monitoring systems, to obtain their statuses, and automatically abort the `Workflow` when it finds the system is unhealthy. The concept is similar to `Container Probes` in Kubernetes. This article describes how to execute status checks in `Workflow` using YAML files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Workflow, the status check could execute specified operations on external systems, such as application systems and monitoring systems, to obtain their statuses, and automatically abort the `Workflow` when it finds the system is unhealthy. The concept is similar to `Container Probes` in Kubernetes. This article describes how to execute status checks in Workflow using YAML files.
```

:::note

Chaos Mesh does not yet support creating `StatusCheck` nodes on Chaos Dashboard, so you could only create `StatusCheck` nodes using YAML for now.

:::

> ## Status Check Type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Status Check type
```

Chaos Mesh only support the `HTTP` type to execute a status check.

### Define a `HTTP` `StatusCheck` node

> A `StatusCheck` node sends `GET` or `POST` HTTP requests to the specific URL, with custom request headers and request body, and then determines the result of the request by the conditions in the `criteria` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `StatusCheck` node sends `GET` or `POST` HTTP requests to the specific URL, with custom headers and body, and then determines the result of the request by the conditions in the `criteria` field.
```

```yaml
- name: workflow-status-check
  templateType: StatusCheck
  deadline: 20s
  statusCheck:
    mode: Continuous
    type: HTTP
    intervalSeconds: 1
    timeoutSeconds: 1
    http:
      url: http://123.123.123.123
      method: GET
      criteria:
        statusCode: "200"
```

In the configuration, you can see a `StatusCheck` node with `HTTP` type. The `deadline` field specifies that this node could be executed for a maximum of 20 seconds. The `mode` field specifies that this node will execute status checks continuously. The `intervalSeconds` field specifies a repetition interval of 1 second. The `timeoutSeconds` field specifies the timeout for each execution.

> When Workflow runs to this `StatusCheck` node, the specified status check would be executed every second. The status check uses the `GET` method to send an HTTP request to the URL `http://123.123.123.123`, if the response is returned within 1 second and the status code is `200`, this execution succeeds, otherwise it fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Workflow runs to this `StatusCheck` node, the specified status check would be executed every second. The status check uses the `GET` method to send an HTTP request to the URL `http://123.123.123.123`. If the response is returned within 1 second and the status code is `200`, this execution succeeds, otherwise it fails.
```

> ## Status Check Result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Status Check results
```

- When the number of consecutive failed `execution results` exceeds the `failureThreshold`, the `status check result` is considered to be a `Failure`.
- When the number of consecutive successful `execution results` exceeds the `successThreshold`, the `status check result` is considered to be a `Success`.

```yaml
- name: workflow-status-check
  templateType: StatusCheck
  deadline: 20s
  statusCheck:
    mode: Continuous
    type: HTTP
    successThreshold: 1
    failureThreshold: 3
    http:
      url: http://123.123.123.123
      method: GET
      criteria:
        statusCode: "200"
```

In the configuration, the `StatusCheck` node will execute status checks continuously:

- When the `execution result` is `Success` for 1 or more consecutive times, the `status check result` is considered to be a `Success`.
- When the `execution result` is `Failure` for 3 or more consecutive times, the `status check result` is considered to be a `Failure`.

:::note

In the following sections, `status check fails` refers to that `status check result` is `Failure`, rather than a single `execution result` is `Failure`.

:::

> ### When the status check is unsuccessful, abort the workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### When the Status Check is unsuccessful, abort the Workflow
```

:::note

The `StatusCheck` node only supports aborting the workflow automatically when the status check is unsuccessful. It could not pause or resume the workflow.

:::

When executing chaos experiments, the application system might become `unhealthy`, this function can be used to restore the application system by quickly ending chaos experiments. To enable the workflow to abort automatically when the status check fails, you can set the `abortWithStatusCheck` field to `true` on the `StatusCheck` node.

```yaml
- name: workflow-status-check
  templateType: StatusCheck
  deadline: 20s
  abortWithStatusCheck: true
  statusCheck:
    mode: Continuous
    type: HTTP
    http:
      url: http://123.123.123.123
      method: GET
      criteria:
        statusCode: "200"
```

The status check is considered unsuccessful when any of the following conditions are met:

- The status check fails.

> - When the `StatusCheck` node timeout is exceeded, and the `status check result` is not successful. For example, `successThreshold` is 1, `failureThreshold` is 3, and when the timeout is exceeded, there are 2 consecutive failures and 0 successes. Although it does not meet the condition for `status check fails`, it's also considered in this case, that the status check is unsuccessful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the `StatusCheck` node timeout is exceeded, and the `status check result` is not successful. For example, `successThreshold` is 1, `failureThreshold` is 3, and when the timeout is exceeded, there are 2 consecutive failures and 0 successes. Although it does not meet the condition for "status check fails", it is also considered to be unsuccessful in this case.
```

> ## Status Check Mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Status Check mode
```

### Continuous Status Check

When the `mode` field is `Continuous`, it means this `StatusCheck` node will execute status checks continuously until the node times out or the status check fails.

```yaml
- name: workflow-status-check
  templateType: StatusCheck
  deadline: 20s
  statusCheck:
    mode: Continuous
    type: HTTP
    intervalSeconds: 1
    successThreshold: 1
    failureThreshold: 3
    http:
      url: http://123.123.123.123
      method: GET
      criteria:
        statusCode: "200"
```

> In the configuration, the `StatusCheck` node will execute status checks every ssecond, and exit when any of the following conditions are met:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the configuration, the `StatusCheck` node will execute status checks every second, and exit when any of the following conditions are met:
```

- The status check fails, i.e. 3 or more consecutive failed `execution results`
- Trigger the node timeout after 20 seconds

### One time Status Check

When the `mode` field is `Synchronous`, it means that this `StatusCheck` node will exit immediately when the `status check result` is clear, or when the node times out.

```yaml
- name: workflow-status-check
  templateType: StatusCheck
  deadline: 20s
  statusCheck:
    mode: Synchronous
    type: HTTP
    intervalSeconds: 1
    successThreshold: 1
    failureThreshold: 3
    http:
      url: http://123.123.123.123
      method: GET
      criteria:
        statusCode: "200"
```

In the configuration, the `StatusCheck` node will execute status checks every second, and exit when any of the following conditions are met:

- The status check succeeds, i.e. 1 or more consecutive successful `execution results`
- The status check fails, i.e. 3 or more consecutive failed `execution results`
- Trigger the node timeout after 20 seconds

> ## Status Check vs HTTP Request Task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## StatusCheck vs HTTP Request Task
```

Similarities:

- The `StatusCheck` node and the `HTTP Request Task` node (the `Task` node that executes HTTP requests) are a node type of `Workflow`
- The `StatusCheck` node and the `HTTP Request Task` node can obtain information about external systems through HTTP requests

Differences:

> - The `HTTP Request Task` node could only send a HTTP once, and cannot send HTTP requests continuously

Author: Is the `.` at the end of this sentence necessary?

> - The `HTTP Request Task` node could only send a HTTP once, and cannot send HTTP requests continuously

Author: dont mind, got that, will fix it soon!
